[AUDIO LOGO]
>> How did the Knights Templar
lay the groundwork for what
would be the new Atlantis?
I'm Scott Wolter,
forensic geologist
and a Knights Templar.
>> And I'm Timothy Hogan,
Grandmaster of the Knights
Templar.
And this is Mysteries
of the Knights Templar.
[THEME MUSIC]
When the Templars were
forced underground
during the years 1307 to
1314, various other orders
were established to
continue the Templar work.
>> Yes, and this was a very
important time in the history
of the Templars, in the
history of establishing the new
Atlantis or United
States of America.
But I think it's
important that we also
want to track the
movement of the treasures
that we know went to
King's Cave in Scotland.
And what happened after
that we're pretty sure
is it moved east.
Eventually getting
to Wemyss Caves.
But the myths, the
legends, and the evidence
suggests that the
treasures spent some time
at Kilwinning Abbey,
which we now call Lodge 0,
right, at Kilwinning.
So we think it went there
and then eventually would
make its way to
the Firth of Forth
on the east side of Scotland.
And on the northern side of the
Firth, we have Wemyss Caves.
And this is where the
treasures were hidden,
and this is where the actual
Templars and their descendants
were protected by the Scottish
earls for almost 80 years.
And if we go back to 1314 and
you talked about Bannockburn,
this is a very important
event in this whole story
because, as you said, the
Scots had been excommunicated
and Robert the Bruce was
more than happy to take
on this excellent
fighting force that
helped turn the
tide at Bannockburn
and really establish
things for not just
Scotland, but for these
fugitive Templars.
And because they had
served, the Scottish earls
were really indebted
to protect them.
And that's exactly
what they did.
So you've got the
Wemyss clan, and you
have the Sinclair clan that's
playing a dominant role
in this history.
And as it turns out,
there are a group
of journals that actually
came to me in 2016 that we
have been vetting ever since.
But what is written
in those early books
by Earl Henry Sinclair
is the details
about exactly what
happened to those treasures
during this time that it
stayed in Scotland until they
were ready to bring
the treasures over
to North America.
Earl Henry brought eight
ships twice, once in 1395,
once in 1398.
And not only did they
bring those treasures
and hide them in multiple
places in North America,
primarily in Nova Scotia and
>> The New Scotland.
>> The New Scotland, and
including Oak Island,
but this was part
of a tradition,
something that was the ultimate
goal of establishing the new
Atlantis, what they
called at that time,
a free Templar state.
And we'll get into the
details more about this.
But it's an amazing hundreds
of years long project
to establish this new Jerusalem.
And that project was
called the Covenant.
So this Covenant was maintained
within a very secretive group
of families and people that were
members of the Templar Order
and the order that
grew out of that
and actually morphed
into modern Freemasonry.
>> This was a critical
point in the shift,
where one of the expressions
that the Templars had
to survive in was Freemasonry.
If you recall, the Templars
had an entire building force
of masons, along
with everything,
practical masons versus
speculative masons.
In fact, the Templar
rules of the 1200s talk
about how the only people
allowed to wear gloves
in the Templar Order are the
priests and the stonemasons
of the Templar Order.
But what ended up happening
was as they went underground,
they already were surviving
in these stonemason guilds.
And at somewhere along the
line, those stonemason guilds
started to become
more speculative.
They were able to
hide the tradition
through Freemason symbology.
And this kind of made sense when
you look at the main working
tools of a mason at the time.
You had the plumb, the
square, and the level.
Well, the plumb dealt
with verticals, the level
dealt with horizontals.
>> Right
>> And the square
united the two.
This literally gives you the
geometry of the Templar cross.
>> The Templar cross.
>> Yeah, so it was an
easy place to hide it.
And then speculative
Freemasonry became
one of the main and
most important bodies
for preserving this
Templar tradition.
>> Well, it had to go that
way when you think about it
because think of
what they're doing.
This is a very, very
dangerous mission,
and you've got to know
who's on your side.
And Freemasonry and
the sign, symbols,
and tokens, the
signs of recognition
that we still use to this
day is purely symbolic today.
But back then, it was literally
a matter of life and death.
So when you gave a
handshake to somebody,
you're going to do something
and he'd better give it back,
or he's not on your side.
>> Yeah.
And he better have the
right dialogue as well.
>> Oh, right.
>> And this all came from
the earlier Templar tradition
of transporting money.
You could deposit money
in Scotland, for example,
within the Templar commandery,
travel to Jerusalem,
give the right forms of
recognition and dialogue--
>> And the passwords.
>> --and the right passwords,
and then they would be able
to retrieve money for you in
Jerusalem that you could then
use.
This way, you wouldn't
be robbed on your way
from Europe to Jerusalem--
>> Carrying a bunch of cash.
>> --carrying a bunch of cash.
So this is really how part of
how the Templar Order initially
became wealthy.
But after the suppression
of the Templar Order,
it became a very
useful tool in order
to hide and figure out
who your friends were
and places you could go.
>> Yeah.
So this became a critical
device, if you will,
that allowed this whole
mission, this covenant
to actually take place.
So what's really interesting
about these journals,
though called the
Sinclair Wemyss journals
is a total of 20 books.
There are 13 that
are written in Latin,
2 that are written
in Old English,
and the last 5 are
written in modern English.
And they span a time
period from the first entry
to the last of 417 years.
And this is this critical period
when really the groundwork
was laid for what would
eventually become the United
States of America.
And it's really beautiful
how some of the entries
are crafted.
But there's two things
that are omnipresent
throughout these journals.
One is that this was
a secret mission.
It was of the utmost
importance and everybody
had to guard the
mission with their life.
The other thing was--
is that they constantly
referenced the goddess, who
was blessing and protecting
this work, and everything
was done in her honor.
And this is an
outgrowth as we talked
about earlier of the true
ideology of the Templars
and the ideology of
the Indigenous people,
who were their brothers
on the other side,
that not only they
met with, but helped
them bury those treasures,
and probably, more
importantly, for
the next 400 years,
they guarded those treasures.
So eventually, when
we get to the point
that the treasures
were recovered and used
to fund the revolution,
it's not only important
that people nowadays
understand the important role
that the Templars played
in American history,
but that the Scottish
earls played,
but the Native Americans played.
>> Part of the Templar mission
from the beginning was this
idea of a free state even
before they were suppressed.
I mean, in Wolfram von
Eschenbach's "Parzival"
from the 1200s,
specifically says,
"If any Templar who were the
grail guardians in this story--
if any Templar should become
ruler of a foreign peoples,
let him ensure that they
are given their rights.
>> Yes.
>> Right.
Well, this was a completely
foreign concept of the day.
I mean, previously, your rights
only came from the church
or from the monarchy.
>> Right.
>> And here's a document
from the 1200s saying, no,
people have God-given
rights they're born with.
>> Right.
>> And that the Templar's
job is to ensure that this is
celebrated and protected.
They did the Peasants'
Revolt in England.
They helped out with that.
They were instrumental
in creating the Magna
Carta in Britain, so that there
would be rights for the people.
And now, as they're
moving to the New World,
the final stage
of their mission,
in order to create a new
Templar state that was free,
that had these states, could
start to be accomplished.
And tied to this, of course,
was that whole Gnostic concept
that the Templars were
perpetuating-- the idea
that the sacred flame,
the inner spirit that's
connected with the
creator's within everybody.
So, therefore, we
should celebrate that.
The spirit of god is within you.
>> Or the power of god.
>> The power of
god is within you.
Yeah.
>> That's one of the anagrams
and cipher phrases that is used
in some of the secret messages
in the Cremona document.
And I find that
very apropos, right?
I mean, you've been saying
that throughout the series.
And then we find out
that it was so important.
It was used as a cipher phrase.
And I'm sure they did that
for superstitious reasons
as well or reasons to
pick a phrase like this
to honor and protect
these sacred messages.
>> Well, so now, let's
fast forward a little bit
because the treasures are moved
over here to North America.
The groundwork is starting to be
laid for a free Templar state.
But in order to
finally break off
the husk of the Old
World, as it were,
we needed to ultimately,
unfortunately,
have a revolution.
And that costs a
lot of money, right?
The Templars had also
established the Kingdom
of Portugal at the time.
They had somewhat autonomy
there because when the Templar
Order was suppressed in 1307
throughout the rest of Europe,
except for Scotland, the only
other place where they weren't
suppressed was in
Portugal because they
had established the Port
of the Grail, The Portugal,
this kingdom.
And it was a seafaring
base of operations.
So it made a lot of sense.
They just changed their name
to the Knights of Christ.
They became a seafaring nation.
Magellan, being one of the
most famous Knights of Christ,
who sailed all over the world.
>> Southern tip of
South America, right?
>> That's right.
That's exactly right.
And ultimately, there
were these other ships
that had escaped
from La Rochelle that
involved hiding these artifacts
and hiding Templars, when
really, this was the start
as well of the whole pirate
tradition.
>> And the privateers.
>> And the privateers, right?
This would be a good point to
talk about the pirate flag--
the skull and crossbones.
It really starts
with understanding
the ossuary culture of the
First Century of Jesus and Mary
Magdalene and John the Baptist
and their Essenic sect.
But basically, what happened
is when somebody died,
only the family of the deceased
could process the body.
And so what they would do is
they would take the deceased
into an underground chamber--
a family tomb, if you will, that
was comprised of two spaces.
One was called the
antechamber that
was open to the southern sky.
And this is where they
would perform rituals.
They would anoint the body
with perfumes and oil.
And then they would
wrap it in a shroud.
Then they would
take the body and go
inside a small door at the
back of the antechamber
into the burial chamber,
the second room.
And inside there,
cut into the walls,
were benches that they
would put the body on.
And they would leave it
there for one to two years.
Then they would come back
and collect the bones.
Bring it back into
the antechamber.
And then they would put the
desiccated body-- the bones--
inside a bone box, that
was only big enough so
that the two largest
bones in the body--
the femurs-- would
fit in crossed.
And then the skull
would go in last.
And now you know the origin
of the skull and cross bones.
At that point, they
would take the ossuary,
go back into the burial chamber,
and underneath those ledges
that were cut-- those benches--
were tunnels called kuhim.
And this is where they
would take the ossuaries,
put a stone lid in, put
it inside these tunnels,
and that's where you would
be interred in perpetuity
inside the family tomb.
So that's the origin of
the skull and crossbones.
>> Well, and related to
that with the cross femurs
in the heraldry of this time
period of the 1200s through
the 1300s.
When a Templar served in the
Holy Land, when he was buried,
he was buried with an effigy of
himself with his legs crossed.
>> Legs crossed.
Yeah.
>> And the legs being crossed
was a symbol that he had served
in the Holy Land.
So the Templars as
they were suppressed,
they were killed
off, or at least they
tried to kill them off.
This new symbol became a
perfect symbol for saying, hey,
we're still around.
We're the people from Jerusalem
who served in Jerusalem.
And we're transporting
this history.
Some have also looked to it as
the skull and crossbones are
very similar, as well,
to the symbol of the chi
rho, the Greek
letters chi and rho,
which stood for
Cristos that you find
within the Christian
iconography.
And so it all ties in, and
it made a perfect symbol
for the Order, as it was
trying to reinvent itself.
Now, as they became
pirates, they
created their own
seafaring nation.
They had their own
democratic system out at sea.
There was an elected
captain, usually.
There were wardens.
There were stewards, the
officers within the ship.
>> Kind of sounds like a
Masonic lodge, doesn't it?
>> That's right.
And ultimately, the Order
began to attack back
at the countries that
had suppressed them
in order to try to get
some of their wealth back.
>> We know that the skull
and crossbones was used.
It goes back to the First
Century and Jesus and Mary
Magdalene and all that.
But what's the connection?
>> Well, there's a bloodline
that came out of them, correct?
And out of that
bloodline, this lineage
was a group of people who were
preserving these mysteries--
these mysteries that
went back to Atlantis,
had gone through places
like Egypt, Jerusalem.
Ultimately, the Templar
Order became a repository
and a protector
of these mysteries
and of this bloodline
of people who
were preserving the tradition.
And this became a
perfect symbol going back
to that point in time.
>> So the treasures are
sitting over in North America.
They were brought
over and checked on
by these Scottish families.
Now, there's a very interesting
story that a lot of people
don't know in the lead
up to the revolution,
when these treasures would
eventually be recovered.
And that was the
Battle of Culloden
in Scotland, where the
Jacobites who were thought
to be Roman Catholic.
But when you go back
and look at King James,
he was actually quite tolerant.
Even though he was
supposedly a Roman Catholic,
he didn't care about what
religions people were, right?
>> And he gave great patronage
to the Masonic systems that
were developing at that time.
>> Bonnie Prince Charlie who
was the one that was the heir
to the throne, that
got kicked out,
and was the leader
of the Jacobites.
Now, a lot of people
don't know this,
but Bonnie Prince
Charlie was actually,
six months before
Culloden, in 1746,
was made the grandmaster
of the Knights Templar.
But here's the part
of the story that
is fascinating that very
few people know about.
As we were in the lead
up to the revolution,
George Washington
sent a contingent
of three men, Freemasons, to
go meet with Bonnie Prince
Charlie, to offer
him the kingship
of the new republic had we
won the war with the Brits.
>> Right.
>> Now, he refused.
And as it turns out--
>> Well, he was felt--
because he felt he
was too old and he
didn't have an heir and that
could cause the whole thing
to fail.
>> Well, and as it turns out
after the revolution when they
won the war, and I
believe it was in 1782,
another contingent was sent by
George Washington to see Bonnie
Prince Charlie again and offer
the kingship to him again.
And they had already won.
But, again, he turned
them down and eventually,
died a few years later.
It was purely a
symbolic gesture, right?
They knew he wasn't going to
live long, as it turns out.
It took a while for us to
finalize our government.
So we weren't really ready
to become the republic
we eventually would.
But the other reason is
installing Bonnie Prince
Charlie, who people
didn't realize
was the grand master of the
Knights Templar, symbolically,
that's a very
powerful statement,
as well as putting
back into power
the kingship of the guy who had
been defeated by the British
that we just defeated
in the revolution.
So that was a big--
to them.
>> That's right.
Of course, the
buildup to all that
with the Revolutionary
War, war costs money.
>> Yes.
>> And fortunately, there had
been assets put away over this
long period of time that had
been brought over to be used
specifically to bring about this
new Templar nation as needed.
>> And you're exactly right.
But at this point, this
covenant of coming,
once with your father, once
with your son, tradition,
to check on the treasures
ended with the last person
to write in the
journals was a guy
by the name of John
Wemyss We call him junior
because his father was senior.
May 6, 1770.
My father having been raised
to the status of Master
Mason in the 46th
British Regiment,
presided over the meeting,
which was attended
by William Ball of
Philadelphia and Benjamin
Franklin, the former provincial
grand master of Pennsylvania.
Remember, we weren't
a country yet.
There were no states.
So the brethren gathered
in the schoolhouse.
And for three hours
were impressed upon
by the presiding brethren the
importance of their mission.
We were each divided
into groups of five
and told to embrace each
other in the coming journey,
and to learn to trust and
depend upon each other
as it would become vitally
important in our task.
The presiding brethren also
imparted their knowledge
of current political
events and told us
that it was important that
the Templar treasure find
its way back to the Grand Lodge
to assist in the upcoming war.
There you have it right there.
We would soon lose control of
the territory in Nova Scotia.
And the brethren
feared it would be lost
if not retrieved straight away.
They also reiterated
that secrecy
was of the utmost important
and that we would always
be surrounded by British
troops and subjects who
might report our every move.
Brother Franklin reminded
us that no matter
what our political or
religious leanings,
our loyalty to the brethren
was most important.
We must honor our commitment
and remember our vows
or the burgeoning nation of free
men might never come to pass.
After a brief supper was
served and prayers were said,
we left to return to
our bunks at Abington,
knowing that the future of
the nation lay in our hands.
I prayed that I would
be a capable leader
and said as much to my father.
He responded that
leaders are not born.
They are created.
The Lord would guide
me in my journey.
I must only have faith
in him as he does in me.
Father made the sign of a cross
on my forehead with his thumb
and gave me his blessing.
I leave with a lighter heart.
This guy is 28 years old.
And he's leading this group
of 46 men and 6 slaves.
So these six slaves were
to be given their freedom
after completing this
mission, of helping
recover those treasures
to found this nation.
They need to be honored
and remembered too.
Benjamin Franklin
in his own words--
this is one of those
secret meetings that
was attended by all Freemasons.
And this is the lead
up to the revolution.
And it was the money
that they needed.
Estimates I've seen say
that there was $160 million
that was spent on the
American Revolution.
But only 60 million of
it can be accounted for.
The big question is, where
did the rest of that money
come from?
This was a Freemasonic mission
to found this nation, that
started with the Templars.
>> Tied in right with that,
I can speak personally from
a family lineage to your point.
>> That's right.
My great, great, great
grandfather seven generations
back was General Joseph
Warren, one of the architects
of the American Revolution.
I mean, he's the one who
initiated Paul Revere
into Freemasonry.
>> That's incredible.
>> And we know then it was these
Masonic lodges that then took
the role in starting
to make this happen.
I mean, the Boston
Tea Party itself was
performed by a Masonic lodge.
The key figures,
including Franklin
himself, who created this
new atmosphere in order
to bring about the revolution,
we're all brothers.
They were all brother
Freemasons that
were passing on this
Templar tradition.
The American Revolution
was, in fact,
the Templar project
of establishing
the groundwork for
the new Jerusalem
or the new Atlantis, which
they also referred to
as the New Covenant.
>> Well, and I think what we
can absolutely conclude is did
modern Freemasonry evolve
from medieval Templarism,
and the answer is
an emphatic yes.
>> Yeah.
Thanks for watching this episode
of Mysteries of the Knights
Templar.
[AUDIO LOGO]